v0.28: Pagination guide (#1753)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/advanced/pagination.md

::: note
By default, Meilisearch returns a maximum of 1000 search results. Consult our [index setting reference](/reference/api/settings.md) if you need to change this.
:::

## Recommended: Previous and next buttons

Pagination interfaces that rely solely on previous and next buttons are similar to page selectors, but do not allow users to jump to an arbitrary results page.

![Placeholder image for prev/next interface]()

Though this approach offers less precision than a full-blown page selector, it does not require knowing the number of total search results.

### Implementation

Previous and next buttons can be implemented using the [`limit`](/reference/api/search.md#limit) and [`offset`](/reference/api/search.md#offset) search parameters.

Paginating requires providing an `offset` that is equal to your `limit` times the page number times: `offset = limit * page number`. We recommend starting page count from 0 instead of 1 when calculating offset values.

For example, if you set `limit` to `20` and want the first page of search results, your `offset` must be 0: `offset = 0 * 20`.

```js
const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 20, offset: 0 });
```

> If you keep the same `limit` and want the third page of results, `offset` must be `40`: `offset = 2 * 20`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want the third page of results, `offset` must be `40`: `offset = 2 * 20`.
```

```js
const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 20, offset: 40 });
```

> Once a query returns less than your configured `limit`, you have reached the last results page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a query returns fewer `hits` than your configured `limit`, you have reached the last results page.
```

It is often helpful to disable navigation buttons when the user cannot move to the "next" or "previous" page. The "previous" button should be disabled whenever your `offset` is 0.

> To disable the "next" button, we recommend setting your query's `limit` to the number of displayed results plus one. The extra result indicates that you have at least one item beyond what you can display in a single results page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To know when to disable the "next" button, we recommend setting your query's `limit` to the number of results you wish to display per page plus one. That extra `hit` should not be shown to the user; its purpose is to indicate that there is at least one more document to display on the next page:
```

```js
const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 21, offset: 0 })

if (offset === 0 ) {

>   // If offset equals 0, we're on the first results page

Reviewer: May be personal preference: when I'm reading docs I like it when the comment comes before the block of code it's describing. I think the lack of indentation also makes it easier to read.

  // and can disable the "previous" buttons
  document.querySelector("#previous_button").disabled = true;
} else {
  document.querySelector("#previous_button").disabled = false;
}

if (results.hits.length < 21 ) {
  // If Meilisearch returns 20 items or less, 

>   // we don't have any more results to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // we don't have any more results to display
```

  // and can disable the "next"
  document.querySelector("#next_button").disabled = true;
} else {
  // If Meilisearch returns exactly 21 results
  // and our page can only show 20 items at a time,

>   // we have at least one more page with 1 result in it

Reviewer: I think this comment isn't necessary. To me it seems self explanatory, but I could be wrong 🤔

  document.querySelector("#next_button").disabled = false;
}
```

## Not recommended: Page selection

> As its name states, this type of pagination is made of a numbered list of pages accompanied by next and previous buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of pagination consists of a numbered list of pages accompanied by next and previous buttons.
```

![placeholder page selection UI](https://vuejsexamples.com/content/images/2018/11/vue-pagination.gif)

> This is is a common UI pattern that offers users a significant amount of precision when navigating results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a common UI pattern that offers users a significant amount of precision when navigating results. However, due to Meilisearch's [limitations](#choosing-the-right-pagination-ui), it is not a good fit for pagination with Meilisearch.
```

### Implementation

> The general implementation of a page selection interface is similar to our [recommended solution](#recommended-previous-and-next-buttons), but you must also display a page list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The general implementation of a page selection interface is similar to our [recommended solution](#recommended-previous-and-next-buttons), but also includes a numbered page list.
```

> To create the page list, however, you must know the exact number of total results. For example, if you have 100 results and your search result pages contain 10 results each, your selector must show a list of numbers going from 1 to 10.

Reviewer: This is really helpful 👍🏻 Might be worth adding a similar explanation to the initial "Choosing the right pagination UI" section.

```suggestion
To create a numbered page list, you must know the exact number of total results. For example, if you have 100 results and your pages contain 10 results each, your selector must show a list of numbers going from 1 to 10.
```

> Since Meilisearch can only give you an estimate of total search results, it can be difficult to implement page selectors when using Meilisearch.

Reviewer: The other reason is that the estimate can change drastically as you page through results, since Meilisearch will often think you need more results (e.g. for infinite scroll) and look for more.

We recommend two different workarounds to create this kind of pagination interface with Meilisearch.

> #### Set a hard limit of results during your search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Set a hard limit on search results
```

By default, a search request returns 20 search results. You can change this value to a much higher number and treat it as the effective maximum of search results you will show a user. Doing so means the size of your `hits` array is the exact number of search results you have to paginate.

> For example, if you set `limit` to 300, every search request made to Meilisearch returns at most 300 documents. If a query returns a `hits` array with 200 items and you want each page to display 20 results, you can create a page selector with 10 pages.

Reviewer: This seems like a very costly method since you are retrieving the full number of search results regardless of whether the user proceeds to the next page. Wouldn't it be better to use the new instance setting `maxTotalHits`, and keep using `limit` for the number of results per page?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand your question @dichotommy.

`maxTotalHits` does not affect the calculation at the time of the search. It just prevents going further than this `maxTotalHits` value when browsing the search results.

Using `limit` at `200` for example forces the engine to be "exhaustive" for the calculation of the 200 results and therefore allows to generate the page selector for these 200 results. Each time you will switch a page, it does not emit a new request because it has been cached on the browser side. Pros. It's fast for any other page than the first one. Cons. You have to choose a high `limit`, it's counter-intuitive and not clean, and slow to render the search results for the first call. 

It's clear that it's expensive and bad for the performance. Hence the fact that this method by page selection is also not recommended.

Author: Thanks for the explanation, @gmourier 👍 

I agree with you: this section should stay. I might change the text slightly so it's clear that `limit` effectively forces an "exhaustive" search (within the configured value, ofc).

// perhaps a code sample here?

This method provides control and reliability. It also prevents users from paginating too far, which avoids performance loss. However, this limits the number of results your users can see.

::: note

> We do not recommend caution when setting high values for `limit` as it can negatively impact performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend caution when setting high values for `limit` as it can negatively impact performance.
```

:::

> #### Accept the unreliable number

Reviewer: This made me lol 😂 
Estimates deserve love too 🥹

> You use `estimatedTotalHits` to calculate the number of search result pages. This means your page count is likely to change until Meilisearch retrives the last search result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this pagination method, use `estimatedTotalHits` to calculate the number of search result pages. This means your number of results and page count are likely to change until Meilisearch retrieves the last search result.
```

For example, a query's `estimatedTotalHits` might be `100` when you fetch the first page of search results. If you are showing 20 results per page, this means your interface will display a page selector with 5 pages. When you fetch the fifth and last page according to Meilisearch's current estimate, however, `estimatedTotalHits` might change to `300`. Your page list, previously displaying 5 pages, must now show 10 total pages.

> This method gives users access to all search results. However, it also results in an interface that might feel unreliable due to constant and unpredictable changes.

Reviewer: Personally, I don't think it's a good idea to include this section. We know that it provides a jarring, unreliable interface for users. I don't really see a benefit to detailing it as an option. But always happy to be convinced or, in this case, overruled ✌🏻

> # Pagination of search results

Reviewer 2: Pagination refers to navigating through results by selecting a page. So it is rather one of many navigation methods.

I would have named the page `Navigating search results` or `Browsing search results`.

That said, it's not a big deal. It might even be interesting to call it pagination so that people can get here more easily because many people use the word pagination to talk about infinite scrolling, load more etc.

You make the call! I just wanted to point out that 😇

## Choosing the right pagination UI

There are quite a few pagination interfaces you might want to implement in your application. Many common UI patterns have a page selector allowing users to jump to any search results page. To create a page selector, you must know the exact number of total results so you can calculate the precise number of results pages.

For performance reasons, however, Meilisearch cannot provide the exact number of results for a query. Instead, When using the search endpoint, responses contain an `estimatedTotalHits` field. As its name indicates, `estimatedTotalHits` is only an estimate of how many documents match your user's query.

Because of this, we do not recommend creating interfaces with page selectors. If page selection is crucial to the software you are developing, see the [last section of this page](#not-recommended-page-selection) for tips that might help you work around Meilisearch's current limitations.

We recommend creating pagination interfaces centered around [previous and next buttons](#recommended-previous-and-next-buttons).

## Recommended: Previous and next buttons

> Using previous and next buttons for pagination means that users can easily page through results, but don't have the ability to jump to an arbitrary results page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using previous and next buttons for pagination means that users can easily navigate through results, but don't have the ability to jump to an arbitrary results page.
```

![Placeholder image for prev/next interface]()

> Though this approach offers less precision than a full-blown page selector, it does not require knowing the precise number of search results. This makes it a good fit for Meilisearch's current capabilities.

Reviewer 3: Could we add a small paragraph that informs the user that this pagination is very similar to the `infiniteScroll` and `load more` pagination type? Without going in deep explaination! Just to make the user aware of what they can do with meili and also make them aware of sexy pagination types that might inspire them not to use the classic finite pagination system :') 

If you prefer not, no problem!

```js
const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 20, offset: 0 });
```

Likewise, if you set `limit` to 20 and `offset` to 40, you skip the first 40 search results and get documents ranked from 41 through 60. We can call this the third results page.

```js
const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 20, offset: 40 });
```

Use this formula to quickly calculate a page's offset value: `offset = limit * (page number - 1)`.

Once a query returns fewer `hits` than your configured `limit`, you have reached the last results page.

#### Disabling navigation buttons for first and last pages

It is often helpful to disable navigation buttons when the user cannot move to the "next" or "previous" page.

The "previous" button should be disabled whenever your `offset` is 0, as this indicates your user is on the first results page.

To know when to disable the "next" button, we recommend setting your query's `limit` to the number of results you wish to display per page plus one. That extra `hit` should not be shown to the user. Its purpose is to indicate that there is at least one more document to display on the next page:

```js

> const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 21, offset: 0 })

Author: ah, I read your suggestions in the wrong order. I see where `dataset` is coming from now, sorry

> const results = await index.search("x", { limit: 21, offset: 0 })

Reviewer 3: Yes its a weird naming I agree :/

// If offset equals 0, we're on the first results page
if (offset === 0 ) {
  document.querySelector("#previous_button").disabled = true;

> } 

Reviewer 3: My bad, I read it incorrectly. You are right!

To create a numbered page list, however, you must know the exact number of total results. For example, if you have 100 results and your search result pages contain 10 results each, your selector must show a list of numbers going from 1 to 10.

Since Meilisearch can only give you an estimate of total search results, it is difficult to implement page selectors when using Meilisearch.

We recommend two different workarounds to create this kind of pagination interface with Meilisearch.

#### Use `limit` to set a maximum number of search results

By default, a search request returns 20 search results. You can change this value to a much higher number and treat it as the effective maximum of search results you will show a user. Doing so means the size of your `hits` array is the exact number of search results you have to paginate.

For example, if you set `limit` to 300, every search request made to Meilisearch returns at most 300 documents. If a query returns a `hits` array with 200 items and you want each page to display 20 results, you can create a page selector with 10 pages.

// perhaps a code sample here?

> This method provides control and reliability. It also prevents users from paginating too far, which might result in performance gains. However, it limits the number of results your users can see. Additionally, we recommend caution when setting high values for `limit` as it can negatively impact performance.

Reviewer 2: 👌

::: note

> By default, Meilisearch returns a maximum of 1000 search results. Consult our [index setting reference](/reference/api/pagination.md#maxtotalhits-1) if you need to change this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, only the first 1000 results of a search query are accessible. Consult our [index setting reference](/reference/api/pagination.md#maxtotalhits-1) if you need to change this.
```

Not sure if it's better, just an idea!

## Recommended: Previous and next buttons

Using previous and next buttons for pagination means that users can easily navigate through results, but don't have the ability to jump to an arbitrary results page.

![Placeholder image for prev/next interface]()

Though this approach offers less precision than a full-blown page selector, it does not require knowing the precise number of search results. This makes it a good fit for Meilisearch's current capabilities.

### Implementation

#### `limit` and `offset`

Previous and next buttons can be implemented using the [`limit`](/reference/api/search.md#limit) and [`offset`](/reference/api/search.md#offset) search parameters.

`limit` sets the size of a page. If you set `limit` to 10, Meilisearch's response will contain a maximum of 10 search results. `offset` skips a number of search results. If you set `offset` to 20, Meilisearch's response will skip the first 20 search results.

For example, you can use Meilisearch's JavaScript SDK to get the first ten films in a movies database:

```js
const results = await index.search("tarkovsky", { limit: 10, offset: 0 });
```

> You can use both parameters together to effectively create search pages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use both parameters together to effectively create search pages.

```

#### Search pages and calculating `offset`

If you set `limit` to 20 and `offset` to 0, you get the first twenty search results. We can call this our first page.

```js
const results = await index.search("tarkovsky", { limit: 20, offset: 0 });
```

> Likewise, if you set `limit` to 20 and `offset` to 40, you skip the first 40 search results and get documents ranked from 41 through 60. We can call this the third results page.

Reviewer 5: Hum with offset `40` and limit `20` you will get documents from `40` to `59` if I'm correct

  const offset = pageNumber * 20
  const results = await index.search('x', { limit: 21, offset })

  // If offset equals 0, we're on the first results page
  if (offset === 0 ) {
    document.querySelector('#previous_button').disabled = true;
  } 

  // If offset is bigger than 0, we're not on the first results page
  if (offset > 0 ) {
    document.querySelector('#previous_button').disabled = false;
  }

  // If Meilisearch returns 20 items or less, 
  // we are on the last page
  if (results.hits.length < 21 ) {
    document.querySelector('#next_button').disabled = true;
  } 

  // If Meilisearch returns exactly 21 results
  // and our page can only show 20 items at a time,
  // we have at least one more page with one result in it
  if (results.hits.length === 21 ) {
    document.querySelector('#next_button').disabled = false;
  }
}

document.querySelector('#previous_button').onclick = function () { updatePageNumber(this) }
document.querySelector('#next_button').onclick = function () { updatePageNumber(this) }
```

## Not recommended: Page selection

This type of pagination consists of a numbered list of pages accompanied by next and previous buttons.

> ![placeholder page selection UI](https://vuejsexamples.com/content/images/2018/11/vue-pagination.gif)

Reviewer 2: Do we want to keep that one @guimachiavelli? (after our discussion yesterday, it may be outdated, I'm just wondering!)

> ![placeholder page selection UI](https://vuejsexamples.com/content/images/2018/11/vue-pagination.gif)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
![Page selection UI navigating through different pages](https://vuejsexamples.com/content/images/2018/11/vue-pagination.gif)
```

This is a common UI pattern that offers users a significant amount of precision when navigating results. However, due to Meilisearch's [limitations](#choosing-the-right-pagination-ui), it is not a good fit for pagination with Meilisearch.

### Implementation

> The general implementation of a page selection interface is similar to our [recommended solution](#recommended-previous-and-next-buttons), but also includes a numbered page list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The general implementation of a page selection interface is similar to our [recommended solution](#recommended-previous-and-next-buttons) but also includes a numbered page list.
```

To create a numbered page list, however, you must know the exact number of total results. For example, if you have 100 results and your search result pages contain 10 results each, your selector must show a list of numbers going from 1 to 10.

Since Meilisearch can only give you an estimate of total search results, it is difficult to implement page selectors when using Meilisearch.

We recommend two different workarounds to create this kind of pagination interface with Meilisearch.

#### Use `limit` to set a maximum number of search results

By default, a search request returns 20 search results. You can change this value to a much higher number and treat it as the effective maximum of search results you will show a user. Doing so means the size of your `hits` array is the exact number of search results you have to paginate.

For example, if you set `limit` to 300, every search request made to Meilisearch returns at most 300 documents. If a query returns a `hits` array with 200 items and you want each page to display 20 results, you can create a page selector with 10 pages.

> In the following JavaScript snippet, each time a user searches, we make a new query with `limit` set to 300. Once we receive the search results, we store them in a variable and create a list of numbered pages. When users click on any number in the page list, we display a new page:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the following JavaScript snippet, each time a user searches, we make a new query with `limit` set to `300`. Once we receive the search results, we store them in a variable and create a list of numbered pages. When users click on any number in the page list, we display a new page:
```
